---
title: Insert title here
key: 1856d0202a99dc94345d5f199ae5cac6

---
## Payment Function

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "8268207d1a"
```

`@lower_third`
name: Name Surname
title: Instructor


`@script`
The first spreadsheet formula that we will cover in this course is arguably the most important - the payment function.


---
## The Payment Function

```yaml
type: "TwoColumns"
key: "a49add5e6e"
```

`@part1`
- Used to determine the principal payments on a loan.
- Constant throughout the term of a loan.
- Uses the PMT function in your worksheet.


`@part2`
Calculation of the Payment function:

> payment = principal / ((((1 + rate)^payments) - 1) / (rate * (1 + rate)^payments))


`@script`
The payment function allows both parties to determine how much the installments will be throughout the loan; assuming that the loan interest and payments remain constant throughout the term.

The function in your spreadsheet that you will use is the PMT function.

If you are following along in a programming language like R or Python, the math to calculate a payment is here as well. 

Fortunately, we don't have to remember that formula; the one that we have in our spreadsheet is much easier to input!


---
## The Payment Function in Spreadsheets

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "390e3a5e4d"
```

`@part1`
``=PMT(Interest Rate, Amortization Periods, Present Value, [Future Value],[End or Beginning])``

- First 3 parameters are required.
- Last 2 are optional and not used in this course.


`@script`
The payment function takes 3 required values - all which we should be familiar with at this point. 

The Interest Rate is the nominal interest rate.
The Amortization Periods is the number of total amortization periods on the loan.
The final parameter, Present Value, refers to the initial balance of the loan.

The final 2 parameters, Future Value and End or Beginning are optional and will not be used. These are cases where we aren't amortizing the loan to zero, or in odd cases where loan payments are made at the beginning of a term instead of at the term.


---
## Payment Formula Example

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "8c3ac3048b"
```

`@part1`
### 15 Year Term Loan

- Principal - $100,000
- Interest Rate - 6% per annum, compounded annually
- Makes payments annually.

``=PMT(6%,100000,15)``

``-10,296.28``


`@script`
On to our first real example of the formula in action!

We are dealing with a 15 year term loan, with a $100,000 principal, 6% per annum nominal interest rate and it pays payments on an annual basis.

Picking any cell on the sheet, type in equals, PMT, left bracket, 6 percent, comma, 100000, comma, 15, then close with the right bracket.

The result should be minus 10,296.28. Now, normally we would want this to show positive, but the formula is telling us that making 10,296.28 payments will pay off the loan in 15 years.


---
## Time to try out the PMT function!

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "44c5156c09"
```

`@script`


